prefacio
========

The modern theory of chaos arguably stems from the publication of Ed Lorenz’s
remarkable paper in 1963 on deterministic nonperiodic flow. It took a while for it to
be noticed outside the meteorological literature, but by the 1970s, the subject was
gaining momentum, courses were created and in the 1980s books started to appear.
At first few in number, but eventually they too became a roaring current. The
subject is now well established, and as well as plentiful literature, there are a
number of dedicated journals.

So the first thing an author needs to do is to provide an excuse for why another
book should be added to the list. There are two reasons, both of which provided a
motivation for the original drafting of this material, and both of which remain valid
in my opinion.

The first is that most of the books on dynamical systems take a particular point of
view, whereas actually the subject is a composite of a number of different historical
strands. For example, Poincaré’s (1892) early investigations were motivated by the
problem of predictability in celestial mechanics, particularly with regard to the
stability of the solar system, and that work led in one way to the KAM theorem and
much of the material concerning stochasticity in Hamiltonian systems; but equally it
led (via the Poincaré–Lindstedt method) to modern methods of perturbation theory
and bifurcation theory. This homogeneity of the subject has largely been lost in
books on chaos, which mostly focus on one subject area or another. The intention
here is to provide a view which accommodates all the different directions the
subject has taken, whether it be Hamiltonian systems, maps or bifurcation theory.

The second reason is found in the book’s title; I am an applied mathematician,
and this means I chart a middle course between that of the physicist and that of the
purer mathematician. But most of the books on chaos are by people who reside in
one or other of these camps, and the flavour of the applied mathematician is rather
different

Applied mathematicians are less interested in theorems and proofs,1 because
most of what they do is too hard to prove anything about. That is not always true,
but it mostly is. They are interested in practicalities, and often this means
approximations. An applied mathematician is less interested in a proof that, for
example, the Lorenz equations have chaotic solutions: he2 is willing to take it on
trust since there is no reason not to think it so. On the other hand, he is a mathe-
matician, and will therefore be worried by the minutiae of (for example) dealing
with homoclinic bifurcations, where it is necessary for peace of mind to pursue the
details and mechanism of proof: these would not be items of much concern for
physicists, who are yet more interested in observations, to the exclusion of some
of the technical detail.

For both these reasons, I, or rather we, feel that the present text will fill a small
gap in the literature. We provide in chapter one a semi-historical overview of the
development and context of the subject, and then in the following chapters we tell
the story of the four horsemen: maps, Hopf and homoclinic bifurcations and
Hamiltonian systems. The final chapter represents an exploration of other topics of
more recent and practical or simply intellectual interest. The treatment is succinct,
but in places we push it to a more challenging level. Such excursions provide
another deviation from other texts. In order to preserve what readability there is, we
have not cluttered the text with references, and we certainly do not aim to be overly
extensive in our bibliography. The ‘Notes and references’ sections at the end of
each chapter provide both citations and also further commentary on, or elaboration
of, some of the earlier text.

The material may be suitable for final-year undergraduate or graduate courses; it
assumes a working knowledge of applied mathematics curricular subjects such as
differential equations, mechanics and nonlinear dynamics. In places, it may assume
a familiarity with other likely staples of the curriculum: fluid mechanics and
mathematical biology, for example. But it also dabbles with material which may be
less familiar to the intended audience, though still essential to the text: point set
topology, and some elements of functional analysis.

In preparing this book for publication, I have taken on as co-author my
long-standing colleague and good friend Mark McGuinness, whose personal
entwinement with my career dates back 40 years. Mark and I met as postdoctoral
research fellows in Dublin in 1979, and we proceeded to write several papers on
chaos in the Lorenz equations, before going our separate ways: he to CalTech and
eventually Wellington, I to M. I. T. and eventually Oxford and subsequently
Limerick. And, eventually, we met up again, and have since been frequent visitors
to each other's institutions. The plan to finish this book coincided with a visit by me
to Victoria University, Wellington, where Mark is Professor in the School of
Mathematics and Statistics, and I have a position of Adjunct Professor, and I am
grateful for this award, without which this book might never have seen the light of
day!

Kilkee, Co. Clare, Ireland Andrew Fowler
February 2019

I am delighted to be involved in writing a book on chaos with my colleague,
co-author and friend Andrew Fowler. It is apposite that this book began during a
visit to Victoria University of Wellington from Andrew in his capacity as Adjunct
Professor, and was completed during my first visit as Adjunct Professor to the
University of Limerick.

My first forays into chaotic dynamics were in 1979 with Andrew and with John
Gibbon, in Dublin, Ireland. We were all newly in town and fresh out of our Ph.D.s,
and free and willing to talk about mathematics in Irish pubs and over meals at each
other’s homes. It was classic stuff, scribbling on napkins, finding connections
between soliton equations and the Lorenz equations, sharpening cusps and using
asymptotic methods to make the connection between differential equations and
one-dimensional maps. It was not until much later that I was to realise that what
happened collaboratively and instinctively in Ireland was very special indeed. This
book is in many ways a celebration of those good times, and of the very productive
years that followed.

Wellington, New Zealand Mark McGuinness


